# Ren'Py for Nintendo Switch
This is a port of [Ren'Py](https://www.renpy.org/), a visual novel game engine, to the Nintendo Switch for **homebrew** purposes.  
If you are looking for a **commercial port** for publishing to the Nintendo eShop, contact [Ratalaika Games](https://www.ratalaikagames.com/services/renpy.php).  
The repository is located at the following URL: https://github.com/uyjulian/renpy-switch  
Ren'Py is a visual novel engine that is written using [Python](https://www.python.org/).  
Discussion of this project is on the [Lemma Soft Forums](https://lemmasoft.renai.us/forums/viewtopic.php?f=32&t=55503).  

## Building
Please view the `external_library_build/Building.md` file for instructions on building the additional third party dependencies.  
Once the steps in the aforementioned file are completed, do the following steps:  
Create the build directory.  
```bash
mkdir build
```
Change directory into the build directory.  
```bash
cd build
```
Run CMake.  
```bash
cmake ..
```
Build.  
```bash
cmake --build .
```

## Debugging
The log for Ren'Py is recorded in the `log.txt` in the `Ren'Py Logs` folder of the SD card root.  
If a Python error occurs, the traceback will be recorded in the `traceback.txt` file in the `Ren'Py Logs` of the SD card root.  
If a native code error occurs, the elf file included in the SDK, which contains symbols, along with the crash report generated by Atmosphere (usually located in the `crash_reports` folder in the `atmosphere` folder of the SD card root), can be used to pinpoint the location of the error.  
The following steps can be used to find the source file name, line, and function name of the native code error:  
1. In the generated crash report file, find the line(s) that contains `renpy-switch +`
2. Open GDB with the elf file by running the following: `aarch64-none-elf-gdb /path/to/renpy-switch.elf`
3. Make a note of the address such as `0x99aabbcc` (indicated by the number after the string(s) found in step 1)
4. Enter the following in the GDB console: `info line *0x99aabbcc` (where `0x99aabbcc` is the address noted in step 3)

## File Formats
It is highly recommended that you use the following file formats:  

* WebP for image assets
* Opus/WebM for audio assets
* VP8/Opus/Matroska for video assets
* RPAv2 for game archives

If these formats are not used, there is a possibility of the program working incorrectly or performance being impacted.  
Free tools such as [FFmpeg](http://ffmpeg.org/), [cwebp](https://developers.google.com/speed/webp/docs/precompiled), and [ImageMagick](https://imagemagick.org/) are available to convert file formats.  
[rpatool](https://github.com/Shizmob/rpatool) can be used to create and merge RPA files, and also convert to RPAv2 format.  
The file format can be changed without changing the file extension, so no script (`rpy` file) changes are needed.  
The file `example.png` can be in the WebP file format without changing the filename to `example.webp`.  

## RomFS Integration (from source)
To integrate the game into one single `nro` file, place game files in a folder named `Contents` in the directory `romfs` (see section File system layout), and build as described in the "Building" section.  
NOTE: If you do not compile the `py` and `rpy` files to `pyo` and `rpyc` respectively by running the game at least once (using either this port or upstream Ren'Py) on a read-write file system, the loading time required until the title screen is seen will be increased.  

## RomFS Integration (from SDK archive)
To integrate the game into one single `nro` file, follow these steps:
1. Place game files in a folder named `Contents` in the folder named `romfs` (see section File system layout).
2. Install package `switch-tools` from devkitPro pacman (follow the installation instructions [here](https://devkitpro.org/wiki/Getting_Started) if you have not already)
3. Add the tools to your PATH: `export PATH=${DEVKITPRO}/tools/bin:$PATH`
4. Generate `control.nacp`: `nacptool --create TITLE AUTHOR VERSION control.nacp`
5. Package everything into an `nro` file: `elf2nro renpy-switch.elf OUTPUT.NRO --romfsdir=romfs --nacp=control.nacp --icon=LOGO.JPG`

## File system layout
The following files or folders are required to be in the same directory as the `.nro` or in RomFS:  
* `lib.zip` - contains the Python stdlib, Ren'Py modules, pygame_sdl2 modules, and libnx binding modules.
* `renpy` - contains the `common` directory used by Ren'Py.
* `renpy.py` - startup script for Ren'Py.
* `game` - contains the game files. This is where you place the game.

## libnx bindings
Ren'Py for Nintendo Switch supports mostly complete [libnx](https://github.com/switchbrew/libnx) bindings.  
The bindings are generated by [SWIG](http://www.swig.org/).  

To use the bindings, you need to import the library `libnx`.  
```py
import libnx
```
To initialize a structure, you can use the following syntax:  
```py
clkrstSession = libnx.ClkrstSession()
```
To access members of a structure, you can use the following syntax:  
```py
service = clkrstSession.s
```
To access a enumeration, you can use the following syntax:  
```py
libnx.PcvModuleId_CpuBus
```
To call a function, you can use the following syntax:  
```py
libnx.clkrstOpenSession(clkrstSession, libnx.PcvModuleId_CpuBus, 3)
```

Example use cases of this feature:  
* Mounting game RomFS  
* Creating save data on the system memory  
* Opening a video in the web browser applet (with hardware acceleration)  
* Opening the software keyboard applet  

## Available Python native modules
The following native Python modules are available in Ren'Py for Nintendo Switch:  
* `_bisect`
* `_codecs`
* `_codecs_cn`
* `_codecs_hk`
* `_codecs_iso2022`
* `_codecs_jp`
* `_codecs_kr`
* `_codecs_tw`
* `_collections`
* `_csv`
* `_ctypes_test`
* `_elementtree`
* `_functools`
* `_heapq`
* `_hotshot`
* `_io`
* `_json`
* `_locale`
* `_lsprof`
* `_md5`
* `_multibytecodec`
* `_random`
* `_sha`
* `_sha256`
* `_sha512`
* `_socket`
* `_sre`
* `_struct`
* `_symtable`
* `_testcapi`
* `_weakref`
* `array`
* `audioop`
* `binascii`
* `bz2`
* `cPickle`
* `cStringIO`
* `cmath`
* `datetime`
* `errno`
* `fcntl`
* `future_builtins`
* `imageop`
* `itertools`
* `math`
* `operator`
* `parser`
* `posix`
* `pyexpat`
* `strop`
* `time`
* `timing`
* `unicodedata`
* `xx`
* `xxsubtype`
* `zipimport`
* `zlib`

## License
This project is licensed under the MIT license. Please read the `LICENSE` file for more information.  
